# Behavioral Interview Questions

1. Tell me about a time when you had to work under extreme pressure.

    - In 2018 during the Solar Eclipse I was working as an air traffic controller at Memphis Center. My area was Nashville which happened to be in the path of totality. This caused a surge of private and commercial aircraft in the area, and one of the busiest times for air traffic control in years.
    - As a controller we need to ensure the safe movement of aircraft through the airspace, which were all trying to occupy the same space under the eclipse. The difficulty was the shear number of aircraft. It was beyond saturation in our airspace.
    - Most days don't need excessive communication, but that day we had to assign a "Tracker" to the airspace so we had 3 controllers looking at one scope. This involved looking for any potential hazards and mitigating them with effective communication and teamwork. From coordinating with adjacent sectors to moving aircraft out of the way of wake turbulence from nearby aircraft. We relied on our training and trust in each other and kept chugging away.
    - Despite the nearly twice saturated airspace, all aircraft were navigated through without incident or loss of separation. It was a challenging day and we were all sufficiently burnt out by the end. Myself and the controllers working with me that day received cash and time off awards for our efforts.
>>  
2. Can you describe a time when you took initiative on a project or task?

    - While working in ATC, I saw that the process of bidding for days off was causing a lot of confusion and dissatisfaction among our employees. The process seemed chaotic and inefficient, leading to miscommunication and, in some instances, some staff members not getting any of their preferred days off.
    - Seeing this problem, I recognized we needed a more fair and transparent system than previous years. I took it upon myself to try to streamline the scheduling process and do it myself.
    - I learned the handbook and staffing requirements for various facilities during different times of the year, and accounting for increased work load periods regarding annual military movements and training I got a grasp on the complexities of ensuring we were adequately staffed while allowing the maximum number of personnel to be away from the facility to enrich social and family lives, a key point of contention amongst the controllers. While ensuring overtime payout was kept to a minimum. I negotiated with management on necessary scheduling times and interviewed over 50 individual controllers on what their wants and needs were and compiled them.
    - The new schedule and system for bidding and compressed work lines allowed a very streamlined calender while surprisingly keeping management happy. Who is historically never happy. There was a significant increase in the satisfaction of the schedule and helped me demonstrate my problem-solving capability by implementing a schedule that nobody thought could work, and nobody thought anyone would want. I was told there was no way I could swing it with management, but I made my case and was ready with anyone oddball scenario they could think of after familiarizing myself with the handbook and controllers wants.
>
3. Tell me about a time when you had to handle a crisis or emergency situation at work?

    - While working my sector, a pilot on a visual flight plan encountered weather they had no planned for. A small general aviation aircraft inadvertently flew into instrument meteorological conditions, which means they suddenly were not able to see anything outside of the cockpit of their aircraft. Statistically speaking, pilots survive 45 seconds after encountering IMC conditions. So the situation had to be rectified expeditiously to say the least.
    - Primary responsibility was to keep the pilot calm and to ensure the aircraft and those on board got clear of the weather by navigating the aircraft out of IMC conditions before they did what we call "controlled flight into terrain. This is a stressful scenario for the pilot because they know their survival odds from their flight training education. This can cause the pilot to become panicked and to no longer listen to ATC instruction.
    - Keeping a calm level demeanor I guided the pilot in an effort to help them maintain their composer. Asking them to maintain straight and level flight and to do simple tasks and to check-in after each task is complete for a new task. While I was doing that I was looking for the shortest path through the weather they had encountered. Finding a suitable route out of the weather I had the pilot set their heading indicator and guided their turns until they were clear. Coordinating with nearby aircraft I was able to get an Army airplane on a regular training mission to fly near the other aircraft to give them a reference point and someone to follow.
    - Thanks to the collaborative efforts of the aircrafts involved and my fellow controllers finding needed information quickly the aircraft successfully navigated the weather unharmed and subsequently landed for an extended rest at the nearest airport until the pop-up storm had passed.